# Chapter 8 Experiments in Practice

## 92. Preparation and AFM Observation of DNA Tiles

This section outlines the process of preparation and Atomic Force
Microscope (AFM) observation of DNA tiles.

**Aliquoting and Storage of DNA**

Custom DNA is shipped in a tube and is usually in a dried paste-like
form in a tube. You will need to dissolve it in an appropriate amount of
ultra-pure water (it’s best if it’s nuclease-free) or TE buffer based on
the quantity (nmol) specified on the label (e.g., for each tube, the
concentration is adjusted to 100 or 500 µM. If n nmol of DNA is present
in the tube, you have to add 10 x n µl of water to get a 100 µM
solution). First, briefly centrifuge the tube to bring any paste on the
inner wall to the bottom, add water down the inner wall, and cap and
vortex the tube for at least a few minutes to dissolve the DNA. Ideally,
you should continue the vortex for several hours to overnight to
thoroughly dissolve the DNA. After the DNA has been dissolved, you
should measure the true concentration of the solution (see sections 77
and 82) to ensure accuracy of your experiment.

The dissolved DNA should be aliquoted in more than one 0.5/0.6 ml tube.
If it is not for immediate use, you should store it at -20°C in a
freezer. This allows long-term storage (a year or longer). If you will
be using it immediately, you should store it at 4°C in a refrigerator.
Under typical storage conditions, DNA will last for a month to several
months. Note that repeated freeze-thaw cycles are deleterious to the
quality of DNA. Once thawed, you should store it at 4°C and use it up as
soon as possible.

**Preparation of DNA Tiles**

Mix the component DNA strands to a final concentration of 1 µM (or that
described in a relevant protocol in the literature) for each batch. In
most cases, you will use a buffer solution that is a TAE buffer
supplemented with magnesium ions to a final concentration of 12.5 mM
(so-called TAE-magnesium buffer). You can prepare and dilute a stock
solution of the buffer, such as a 5-fold (5x) or 10-fold (10x)
concentrate, into a final concentration of 1x. In the case of tiles
composed of two different DNA strands, such as T-motif \[1\], you will
get a final concentration of 1 µM of each DNA and a final concentration
of 1x of the buffer by mixing them as follows:

- 10 x TAE/12.5 mM Mg<sup>2+</sup> buffer 5 µl
- Nuclease-free water 44 µl
- 100 µM DNA (1) 0.5 µl
- 100 µM DNA (2) 0.5 µl
- (50 µl in total)

This solution can be subjected to annealing on a thermal cycler or hot
water in a Styrofoam box to assemble the desired structure (see section
76).

**AFM Observation**

For details of the principles of AFM, see section 84. In general, DNA
nanostructures are observed in liquid using tapping or an equivalent
mode (tapping mode is a registered trademark of Veeco, USA), as briefly
described below.

To observe a DNA nanostructure in liquid under AFM, the structure must
be adsorbed on a (two-dimensional planar) substrate, which is often made
of mica. Cleaved surfaces of mica are smooth at the atomic level.
Because such a surface is negatively charged, as shown in the figure
below, it can electrostatically adsorb DNA through magnesium or other
multivalent ions (the mechanism of the adsorption is not yet fully
understood at the atomic level).

![](images/ch8/ch8fig01.png)

First, freshly prepare a cleaved surface of a mica flake (conveniently,
the mica flake should be attached in advance to the metal holder of the
AFM). To do this, pull off a layer(s) from the mica flake using scotch
tape or the like. Repeat this until you obtain a good cleaved surface.
Then add the solution containing the DNA nanostructure onto the cleaved
surface dropwise, to let the surface adsorb the structure. After you
observe the "crowdedness" of the prepared structure, you should
fine-tune the appropriate concentration, adsorption time, and total
volume of the solution. How much you change these variables will depend
on the size, shape, and attachment of the holder you use.

Add the sample onto the mica dropwise, let it stand while it adsorbs,
and start your observations. Mount the cantilever (probe) on the holder,
wet the cantilever with the sample buffer, and attach the holder to the
body of the AFM. Be careful that there are no air bubbles between the
cantilever and the mica.

Measure the resonant frequency of the cantilever. Let it oscillate at
the frequency that gives the greatest resonance, while moving it toward
the mica surface (this process is usually semi-automated by software).
As the cantilever approaches the mica surface, it changes the
oscillation amplitude. The amplitude is detected by the software and the
scanning process is started automatically. Because DNA is flexible, keep
the probe as close as possible to the mica surface but with a small
amplitude during the observation, so that you will never catch the
structure on the cantilever and break it. Figuring out how to do this
will depend on the instrument and the cantilever you use. You should
follow the protocol of the laboratory to which the instrument belongs.

AFM for Your BIOMOD Project

As seen from above, DNA tiles are relatively easy to prepare. However,
successfully observing them by AFM requires some experience and
know-how. The most reliable way is to ask any laboratory member
experienced in AFM (or any AFM operator from the BIOMOD team from a
previous year) to train one or two of your team members in AFM
observation. With proper training, it should only take you a few weeks
to a month before you can operate an AFM mostly by yourself. Until you
get fully used to it, however, even observing one sample will take at
least several hours; be prepared for some failure, even if you follow
the protocol properly. It’s wise to build in some extra time in your
project to learn this technology.

_—Shogo Hamada (Cornell University)_

## 93. Preparation and Observation of DNA Origami

This section describes preparation and observation of DNA origami.

Preparation of DNA Origami

Preparing DNA origami requires two steps: annealing and purification.
During the annealing, the components needed to assemble the DNA origami
(scaffold and staple strands) are mixed and assembled into the structure
at a decreasing or constant temperature. During purification, excess
components are removed.

A particular type of DNA, M13mp18 (7249 bp; e.g., NEB cat \#N4040S, 250
µg/ml, about 100 nM) is often used as a scaffold. Alternatively, you
can use a single-stranded form of a standard plasmid or PCR product.

To make 10 µl of product, you can assume the staples should be present
at a molar concentration 5 to 100 times that of the scaffold. If the
structure is simple (e.g., a square sheet), even about 5 times can be
efficient. If the structure is complex, it might require an excess
amount of the staples for successful folding.

- Scaffold 4 µL
- Staple mix 5 µL
- 10 x buffer\* 1 µL

The buffer consists of a pH buffering agent, divalent ions
(Mg<sup>2+</sup>), monovalent ions (Na<sup>+</sup>, K<sup>+</sup>, and
counter ions such as Cl<sup>-</sup>), a chelating agent, and so on. The
buffer composition will depend on the structure, but you can start with
the following.

\* <span class="underline">10 x buffer 1ml</span>

- Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) f.200 mM, 1 M 200 µl
- MgCl<sub>2</sub> f.150 mM, 1 M 150 µl
- NaCl f. 25 mM, 1 M 25 µl
- EDTA-Na (pH 8) f.10 mM, 0.5 M 20 µl

The annealing can be done in two ways: either at a decreasing
temperature with a constant ramp rate (linear cooling method) or at a
constant temperature (isothermal folding method, Sobczak et al. 2012).
The linear cooling method generally produces a higher yield. However, if
you do not need a high yield, the isothermal folding method works well
because it is faster. Different structures have different optimal
annealing conditions. In the case of a known structure already reported
in a paper, you can rely on the conditions described in the paper. In
the case of a novel structure, you will have to optimize the buffer and
other conditions. If you choose the isothermal method, you should test
several temperatures in a 4-hour reaction to find the optimal
temperature, after which you can efficiently determine the optimal
Mg<sup>2+</sup> concentration, Na<sup>+</sup> concentration, and
reaction time. Most conveniently, you can examine the formation of the
structure using gel electrophoresis. However, you have to use AFM and/or
electron microscopy in addition to gel electrophoresis to establish that
you have obtained the desired structure.

A gel filtration column (e.g., Millipore 100 kDa Amicon filters (cat
\#UFC510024) or GE MicroSpin S-300 HR columns (code \#27-5130-01)) is
the most convenient method for purification. Gel electrophoresis/cutting
out (Douglas SM et al. 2009, Castro CE et al. 2011) can improve the
quality of your product.

**Analysis by Gel Electrophoresis**

Agarose gel electrophoresis is commonly used because it allows easy and
simple examination, and also allows for purification by gel band
extraction (see section 79 for details). The optimal agarose gel
concentration depends on the structure of your product, but you should
start with electrophoresis on 1%. In order to avoid overheating during
electrophoresis, which will disturb the band pattern, you should perform
electrophoresis in a cold room or in a refrigerator. If the
concentration of Mg ions, which are necessary to maintain the structure,
is too high, it will cause overheating. You should choose about 12 mM
for the gel buffer for electrophoresis. The electrophoresis should be
performed at 50 V (not at 100 V as usual), for 1 to 2 h in the case of a
6 cm-long Mupid-type gel.

<span class="underline">Gel buffer 500 mL</span>

- 10 x TBE 50 ml
- 1 M MgCl<sub>2</sub> 6 ml
- (10 x TBE: Nakalai \#35440-31, Life technologies \#15581-044, Sigma
\#93290) <span class="underline">1% agarose 50 mL</span>
- Agarose 0.5 g
- Gel buffer up to 50 ml

(Agarose: Takara \#5003 or equivalent)

This is melted in a microwave and poured into a tray. Be careful not to
burn yourself. Use a conical flask or bottle to pour the solution.

After electrophoresis you will need to stain. You can use EtBr (highly
sensitive but carcinogenic) as a staining agent, made by SYBR safe (Life
technologies \# S33102), Midori Green (Nippon Genetics \#NE-MG04 or
NE-MG06), or the like. Alternatively, the EtBr can be added to the gel
before electrophoresis, which saves time. However, staining after
electrophoresis will give you a better result.

If the concentration is low in the cut out sample, you should use a PEG
precipitation process (Stahl E et al., 2014). Prepare a 1:1 mixture of
precipitation buffer (15% PEG 8000 (w/v), 5 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5-8.3), 1
mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl) and the sample (the sample should be supplemented
with Mg<sup>2+</sup> beforehand, to adjust the Mg<sup>2+</sup>
concentration of the mixture to 10 mM or more), and centrifuge it at
16,000 G for 5 to 25 minutes at room temperature.

**AFM Observation**

See section 84 for details. The sample is observed on either dried mica
or in liquid mica.

**EM Observation**

Here we describe a procedure for negative staining. The original paper
describing this process used uranyl formate as the staining agent, which
is currently not available in Japan. You can use a more common
alternative, uranyl acetate, to conduct the observation.

1\. Hydrophilization of the grid (Funakoshi (Polysciences) cat\#24945)

2\. Preparation of the staining solution: Mix 27 µL of 3% uranyl acetate
and 51 µL of MQ, and subject it to 5 minutes of benchtop centrifuge. Add
2 µL of 1 M NaOH to the solution and vortex it for 3 minutes (vortex it
at once to avoid any precipitation). Benchtop centrifuge it for 3
minutes. Enclose it in aluminum foil and use it on the same day because
needle-like crystals will grow over time, hindering the observation.

3\. Mount the sample on the grid:

3-1. Mount 3 µL of the sample and wait for 3 minutes (dilute the sample
stock solution by 10 to 100-fold). Meanwhile, place 12 µL of the
staining solution on Parafilm.

3-2. Blot up excess sample from the edge with filter paper. Do not touch
the grid surface.

3-3. Immediately contact the grid surface with the staining solution
droplet to transfer the staining solution onto the grid. Let it stand
for 40 seconds.

3-4. Blot up the staining solution from the edge with filter paper. Do
not touch the grid surface. Let it stand for 30 minutes (actually, about
10 minutes will be enough because it is dried to a substantial extent by
the blotting).

4\. Place the sample on the EM and observe it after focusing.

<span id="c93" class="anchor"></span>Hisashi Tadakuma (Kyoto University)

## 94. Preparation/Observation of DNA Gate

This section describes preparation and electrophoretic analysis of a
gate driven by strand-displacement reaction of DNA.

Experimental Verification of a DNA Reaction System

For any system you are using, you must establish experimentally the
function of your system, or the cause of any failure in your system. Gel
electrophoresis, which separates molecules based on their size (see
section 79), is one of the most basic commonly used experimental
techniques to do this.

This section describes a series of experimental procedures to produce a
hybridization chain reaction (HCR, see section 27) \[1\] driven by
strand displacement of DNA. In this reaction, two hairpin DNA strands,
H1 and H2, are opened by an input DNA I in a chain reaction.

Stock Preparation

Any dried custom DNA received from a supplier (see section 72) needs to
be dissolved in a solvent. You should make the master stock in pure
water in case you have to change buffer conditions later. For most
systems, a concentration of 100 µM will do, which can be prepared as
follows.

<span class="underline">100 µM DNA stock</span>

Dried DNA: x \[nmol\]

Ultra pure water (mQ): 10 x x \[µL\]

x is the quantity of DNA synthesized. If you have 12.4 \[nmol\] of DNA,
add 124 \[µL\] of pure water. Do the same for each of the three strands
H1, H2, and I. Centrifuge and vortex the tube well to dissolve the DNA
(see section 75). If the DNA is not thoroughly dissolved, the
concentration might vary between experiments. The master stock should be
stored frozen, and thawed as necessary.

The DNA concentration of the master stock, which is based on the
quantity specified by the supplier, might not be accurate. In order to
have an accurate molar ratio, you should measure the absorption spectrum
to determine the true concentration (see section 77). Any aliquot after
this should be based on the true concentration (for example, a nominal
100 µM master stock might prove to be 85 µM).

If the sample is highly concentrated, you have to prepare it directly
from the master stock. However, you should prepare a moderately
concentrated working stock in a buffer, which is also effective for
avoiding any contamination. For an hybridization chain reaction (HCR),
you will need a 3 µM working stock for each H strand and a 30 µM stock
for the I strand. The composition of these stocks will be as follows.

<span class="underline">3 µM DNA stock</span>

- DNA (100 µM): 3 \[µL\]
- 10 x buffer: 10 \[µL\]
- Ultra pure water (mQ): 87 \[µL\]

<span class="underline">30 µM DNA stock</span>

- DNA (100 µM): 30 \[µL\]
- 10 x buffer: 10 \[µL\]
- Ultra pure water (mQ): 60 \[µL\]

The buffer solution, or simply buffer (see section 75), you can use when
doing HCR consists of 50 mM Na<sub>2</sub>HPO<sub>4</sub> and 0.5 M
NaCl. You can use a TAE/Mg<sup>2+</sup>, an NEB buffer, or something
similar, depending on your system. Note that the buffer is prepared as a
10 x concentrate.

9 µM of H1 and H2 are annealed in separate tubes (see section 76) to
ensure formation of their hairpin structure. The original paper
describing this technique specified that the annealing should proceed
from 95°C to room temperature over one hour.

**Sample Preparation**

Working stocks are used to prepare samples for electrophoresis. During
HCR, the molar ratio of the input to H1 and H2 affects the average
number of reactions in the chain reaction, and thus the size of the
structure to be produced. Prepare samples of the following compositions.

<span class="underline">HCR sample</span>

- DNA H1 (3 µM): 10 \[µL\]
- DNA H2 (3 µM): 10 \[µL\]
- DNA I (3 µM): y \[µL\]
- 1x buffer: 30 - y \[µL\]

<span class="underline">HCR sample</span>

- DNA H1 (3 µM): 10 \[µL\]
- DNA H2 (3 µM): 10 \[µL\]
- DNA I (30 µM): z \[µL\]
- x buffer: 30 - z \[µL\]

y or z is the amount of I to be added. Specifically, 6 samples are
prepared in total, each corresponding to y = 0, 1, or 3.2 or z = 1, 3.2,
or 10. Note that the buffer is added as a 1x concentrate.

Before the next step, the samples should be left at room temperature for
24 hours to complete the HCR reaction. In this manner, multiple samples
are prepared by mixing the working stocks in different combinations and
allowing them to react for a sufficient time. In this case, each mixture
contains all of the H1, H2, and I. For a detailed comparison, you can
repeat the reaction with samples that contain/lack only one of them,
and/or with different reaction times.

**Electrophoresis**

The reacted samples are subjected to electrophoresis to analyze the size
of the resulting molecules. An appropriately sized DNA ladder marker is
electrophoresed together. The DNA ladder is available from Takara Bio
and other companies \[2\]. Note that the product as received has a high
concentration, possibly resulting in bands much more intense than those
of the HCR samples. To better quantify the HCR samples, the ladder
should be diluted about 10 to 100 times before use.

Once all the samples are ready for loading into the wells of the gel,
you can analyze them according to a protocol for electrophoresis (see
section 79). For HCR, use 1% agarose gel electrophoresis. You may need
to change conditions such as the gel concentration and/or denaturing
agent, depending on the system you want to analyze.

Fig 1 shows the result of the electrophoresis, previously reported in a
paper. Lower concentrations of I provide larger macromolecules, while
there is no reaction in the absence of I.

In this manner, the behavior of the system can be examined qualitatively
based on the band pattern. In addition, it can be examined
quantitatively (see section 80) to determine reaction rate and
efficiency, etc.

![](images/ch8/ch8fig02.png)


**Fig. 1.** Electrophoresis data from HCR. Reprinted from PNAS, 2004 \[1\].

_—Ibuki Kawamata (Tohoku University)_


## 95. Preparation and Observation of DNA Tweezers

Structural changes on the nanometer scale can be observed by
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET). Unlike electrophoresis,
FRET can monitor the time course of fluorescence to understand the
system in detail, by determining the reaction rate constant and so on.
This section describes preparation and FRET analysis of DNA tweezers.

Observation on a Small Spatiotemporal Scale

A basic technique to verify/examine your system is electrophoresis (see
section 79). In electrophoresis, you can obtain qualitative information
on the effect of different conditions on the reaction by comparing
multiple lanes (see section 80). For quantitative analysis, you have to
compare intensity of bands, which is difficult to do with good
reproducibility. Moreover, electrophoresis uses a limited number of
lanes, and thus cannot analyze the system at a high temporal resolution.
In addition, electrophoresis cannot essentially separate molecules of
similar sizes, and cannot observe them as separate bands.

Spectrophotometry is a technique to observe reactions on a
spatiotemporal scale that cannot be analyzed electrophoretically (see
section 81). Specifically, spectrophotometry observes the fluorescence
resonance energy transfer (FRET) between a fluorescent molecule and a
quencher molecule in a DNA system (see section 51). FRET can quantify
the distance between the fluorescent molecule and the quencher molecule
on the nanometer scale, at a temporal resolution of an order of seconds.

DNA tweezers are a good example for giving an overview of how to use
FRET in an experiment. DNA tweezers are opened and closed by DNA signals
\[1\] (see section 24). The structure of DNA tweezers is composed of
three DNA strands A, B, and C, which requires two signal DNA strands
F<sub>O</sub> and F<sub>C</sub> to open and close the tweezers.

Sample Preparation

First, dissolve each sample of dried DNA as received in pure water to
make a 100 µM master stock, as described previously (see section 94).
Then use the master stock to make a 20 µM working stock as shown below.
Then prepare a mixture of DNA A, B, and C, each at 1.1 µM.

<span class="underline">20 µM DNA sample</span>

DNA (100 µM): 20 \[µL\]

10 x buffer: 10 \[µL\]

Ultra pure water (mQ): 70 \[µL\]

<span class="underline">1.1 µM DNA sample</span>

DNA A (20 µM): 4.95 \[µL\]

DNA B (20 µM): 4.95 \[µL\]

DNA C (20 µM): 4.95 \[µL\]

1 x buffer: 75.15 \[µL\]

The author's laboratory uses TAE/Mg<sup>2+</sup> as the buffer, whereas
the original paper used SPSC.

Fluorescence allows you to observe the response of the system to the
input DNA strands. In principle, samples of a higher concentration and a
smaller volume are added to a sample of lower concentration and larger
volume, to minimize the dilution of the fluorescent molecule that could
affect the fluorescence intensity. In this example, we used 1.1 µM and
20 µM samples. Other concentrations may be used depending on the nature
of the fluorescent molecule and the sensitivity of the
spectrophotometer, but with at least an about 10-fold difference.

Observation of Fluorescence

Once the samples are ready, proceed to spectrophotometry. Input these
samples in the correct order, and observe the fluorescence for each
input. In the case of DNA tweezers, molecule A is modified with the
fluorescent molecule TET and the quencher TAMRA. In the initial state,
the long distance allows it to emit the fluorescence of TET.

The principles and experimental procedures of fluorescence
spectrophotometry are described elsewhere (see section 81). Below is a
list giving amounts of samples to be added to the cell and the reaction
times.

<span class="underline">Fluorescence spectrophotometry experiment</span>

(1) Add 90 µL of the 1.1 µM DNA sample (A, B, and C) to the cell.

(2) Let it stand for a sufficient time (about 30 minutes).

(3) Start recording by the instrument.

(4) Wait for 300 seconds.

(5) Add 5 µL of 20 µM F<sub>C</sub>.

(6) Wait for 500 seconds.

(7) Add 5 µL of 20 µM F<sub>O</sub>.

(8) Wait for 500 seconds.

(9) Repeat steps (5) to (8).

A, B, and C in step (1) may be annealed in advance (see section 76) to
ensure formation of the desired structure. In this example, they are
simply mixed and vortexed well (see section 75) before use.

The purpose of step (2) is to wait for the lamp (light source) of the
spectrophotometer and the temperature of the sample to become stable,
during which you should set the wavelength of the excitation light, the
wavelength of the fluorescence, the slit size, and so on. In this case,
the fluorescence molecule is TET, and the excitation wavelength and the
fluorescence wavelength are 520 nm and 541 nm, respectively. Carefully
choose the settings because the excitation light might overlap with the
longer wavelength of the fluorescence, or there might be problems with
the SN ratio, etc. Keep agitating the solution with a stirrer and keep
the temperature constant by using a temperature controller.

Once the fluorescence has become stable, push the start button on the
instrument to record the fluorescence intensity. First, record the
fluorescence for the open form for 300 seconds.

Then, add the signal DNA F<sub>C</sub> to close the tweezers. To observe
the decrease in the fluorescence intensity caused by closing the
tweezers, wait for 500 seconds to allow the DNA tweezers in the solution
to close. Since time for the reaction to be completed depends on the
reaction rate, we cannot unequivocally define a time for this part of
the experiment. You can wait until the fluorescence intensity becomes
stable, or for a predetermined time.

Then, repeat these steps by adding DNA F<sub>O</sub> to open the
tweezers again.

Analysis of Experimental Results

You can plot the data obtained by the FRET observation in a graph with
the horizontal axis representing time and the vertical axis representing
fluorescence intensity, as shown in FIG. 1. The initial fluorescence
intensity corresponds to the open state. Then, the addition of
F<sub>C</sub> causes the fluorescence intensity to decrease, reflecting
the closing of the tweezers. Then, the addition of F<sub>O</sub> causes
the fluorescence intensity to increase, reflecting the opening of the
tweezers. Note that the repeated addition dilutes the solution, leading
to a gradual decrease in the maximum fluorescence intensity.

These data provide information on the reaction time and rate.
Specifically, you can fit the data to a second-order reaction rate
function (see section 39) from a numerical library (see section 60) to
calculate the reaction rate constant. Note that the fluorescence
intensity (vertical axis) has a dimensionless value and thus needs
normalization.

This kind of experiment can also be applied to analysis of DNA systems
driven by enzymatic reaction \[2\] (see section 33). In that case, qPCR
instruments and tubes are used instead of spectrophotometers and cells.
This method also allows for time course observation of a spectrum in
addition to a single wavelength.


![](images/ch8/ch8fig03.png)


**Fig. 1.** FRET results (provided by Tohoku University).

_—Ibuki Kawamata (Tohoku University)_


Molecular Robotics Research Group ed.

Design of DNA Molecules: A Comprehensive Beginner's Guide to BIOMOD
(2016)

April 15, 2016

The copyright of this book belongs to the authors. CBI society reserves
the right to reproduce, distribute, modify, and republish this book.

ISBN 978-4-9903708-9-3